.TH "FreeSCI tools" 6 "Sep 15, 2000" cvs20000914 FreeSCI

.SH NAME
.HP
.BR classes 
\- lists all SCI classes
.HP
.BR sciconsole 
\- A command console for inspection of SCI data
.HP
.BR listwords 
\- Lists all words (except for suffix alternatives) understood by the game
.HP
.BR scidisasm 
\- Disassembles all script resources into .script files
.HP
.BR sciunpack 
\- A tool for unpacking and converting SCI resource data
.HP
.BR scriptdump 
\- disassembles all selector methods into SCI assembly
.HP
.BR vocabdump 
\- Displays kernel function and selector names (obsolete)

.SH DESCRIPTION
.P
FreeSCI is a portable interpreter for SCI games, such as the Space Quest
series (starting with SQ3) or Leisure Suit Larry (2 and sequels).
.P
This man page describes the tools that come with FreeSCI. The main
executable (which you're probably interesed in if you want to play SCI 
games) is described in \fBsciv\fR(6).

.BR CLASSES
.P
The \fBclasses\fR program lists all SCI classes in the resource files in
the currect directory. It doesn't have any command line options.

.BR SCICONSOLE
.P
The \fBsciconsole\fR program provides a command console for inspection
of SCI data. It reads the SCI resource files from the current directory.
There are no command line options.

.BR LISTWORDS
.P
The \fBlistwords\fR tool lists all words (except for suffix alternatives) 
understood by the game.
It reads the SCI resource files from the current directory. 
.P
It has three command line options: \fB--version\fR prints the version
and exists; \fB--sort-alpha\fR sorts the words in alphabetical ordering;
\fB--sort-group\fR sorts the words in group ordering.

.BR SCIDISASM
.P
The \fBscidisasm\fR program disassembles all script resources in SCI
resource files in the current directory into \fI.script\fR files.
.P
It takes five optional command line switches: \fB--version\fR prints the
version number and exists; \fB--help\fR displays a short help message
and exists; \fB--hexdump\fR hex dumps all script resources;
\fB--verbose\fR prints additional disassembly information;
\fB--opcode-size\fR prints opcode size postfixes.

.BR SCIUNPACK
.P
\fBsciunpack\fR is a tool  for  unpacking  and  converting SCI
resource data
.P
Usage: \fBsciunpack\fR [\fIoptions\fR] <\fIresource.number\fR>
.P
Alternatively, the resource type and number can be specified as two
seperate options.
.P
Available resources are: \fBview\fR, \fBpic\fR, \fBscript\fR,
\fBtext\fR, \fBsound\fR, \fBmemory\fR, \fBvocab\fR, \fBfont\fR,
\fBcursor\fR, \fBpatch\fR, \fBbitmap\fR, \fBpalette\fR, \fBcdaudio\fR,
\fBaudio\fR, \fBsync\fR, \fBsync\fR, \fBmessage\fR, \fBmap\fR,
\fBheap\fR.
.P
If * is specified instead of <number>, all resources of given type 
will be unpacked.
.P
There are several options available:
.TP
.BR --version
Prints the version number.
.TP
.BR "--verbose, -v"   
Enables additional output.
.TP
.BR  "--help, -h"   
Displays a short help message.
.TP
.BR  "--list, -l"       
List all resources.
.TP
.BR  "--output-file \fI<file>\fR, -o\fI<file>\fR"       
Selects output file \fIfile\fR.
.TP
.BR  "--gamedir \fI<dir>\fR, -d\fI<dir>\fR"       
Read game resources from \fIdir\fR.
.TP
.BR  --with-header          
Forces the SCI header to be written (default).
.TP
.BR  --without-header       
Prevents the two SCI header bytes from being.
written
.TP
.BR  --palette-dither       
Forces colors in 16 color games to be dithered.
.TP
.BR  --palette-interpolate  
Does color interpolation when drawing picture resources.
.TP
.BR  --palette-dither256    
Does dithering in 256 colors.
.TP
.BR  --no-conversion        
Forces sound and pic resources not to be converted to General MIDI /
Portable Network Graphics files.
.TP
.BR  --dissect              
Dissects script resources, stores in <number>.script.
.P
As a default, 'resource.number' is the output filename, with the
following exceptions:
.IP -
sound resources: will be converted to General MIDI, stored in
\fI<number>.midi\fR
.IP -
picture resources: Will be converted to PNG (Portable Network Graphics),
stored in
\fI<number>.png\fR
.P
This behaviour can be overridden with the --no-conversion switch.


.BR SCRIPTDUMP
.P
The \fIscriptdump\fR tool can be used to disassemble all selector  
methods  into  SCI assembly. It takes no command line options and reads
the resource files from the current directory.

.BR VOCABDUMP
.P
This tool can be used to display  kernel function and selector names. It
is obsolete. You should rather use \fBsciconsole\fR.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sciv (6).

.SH AUTHORS
.P
This software is copyright (c) 1999,2000 by
Christoph Reichenbach <\fIcreichen@rbg.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de\fR>,
Carl Muckenhoupt <\fIcarl@wurb.com\fR>,
Dmitry Jemerov <\fIyole@exch.nnz.spb.su\fR>, 
Magnus Reftel <\fId96reftl@dtek.chalmers.se\fR>,
Sergey Lapin <\fIslapin@karelia.ru\fR>,
Lars Skovlund <\fIlskovlun@image.dk\fR>,
Rickard Lind <\fIrpl@dd.chalmers.se\fR> and
Rink Springer <\fIrink@springer.cx\fR>.
.P
This man page was written by Bas Zoetekouw <\fIbas@debian.org\fR>.

