.\" (C) Copyright 2001 Bas Zoetekouw and Christoph Reichenbach
.\" (bas@debian.org and creichen@rbg.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since FreeSCI is constantly changing, this manual page may be
.\" incorrect or out-of-date.  The authors assume no responsibility for
.\" errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the
.\" information contained herein.  The authors may not have taken the same
.\" level of care in the production of this manual, which is licensed free
.\" of charge, as they might when working professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Sun Dec 30 14:55:13 2001 by Bas Zoetekouw`
.\"
.TH freesci 6 "Jan 19th, 2003" "FreeSCI 0.3.4" FreeSCI

.SH NAME
freesci \- free interpreter for SCI bytecode


.SH DESCRIPTION
.P
FreeSCI is a portable interpreter for SCI games, such as the Space Quest
series (starting with SQ3) or Leisure Suit Larry (2 and sequels); see
below for a complete listing.
.P
\fBfreesci\fR is the main executable which loads, links and runs SCI bytecode.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B freesci
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fIgame\fR [\fIsavegame\fR]]

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.BR \fIgame\fR
An identifier describing the game to start. This identifier (GAME_ID) must be
declared in the configuration file. If omitted, the interpreter will attempt
to read resource files from the current working directory (or the
directory specified by the \fB\-\-gamedir\fR option).

.TP
.BR \fIsavegame\fR
If this option is specified after the game name, the interpreter will attempt
to quickload the savegame with the specified ID (see the
\fB\-\-list\-savegames\fR option). This is technically different
from restoring a savegame from within the game (as it does not re\-start the game
script state afterwards), but it should work just as well.

.TP
.BR "\-\-version, \-v"
Display version number and exit.
Also the supported graphics drivers, sound servers, midi and midiout
drivers are reported.

.TP
.BR "\-\-help, \-h"
Display a short help text and exit.

.TP
.BR "\-\-run, \-r"
Do not start the debugger; only run the game. This is the default action.

.TP
.BR "\-\-debug, \-D"
Start up in debug mode.

.TP
.BR "\-\-list\-savegames, \-l"
This option instructs the interpreter not to run the game, but rather to list
all savegames stored for it, including their in\-game descriptions where
available.
This is relevant to figure out savegame names for quickloads.
The usual in\-game savegames are labelled \*(lqsave_0\*(rq through 
\*(lqsave_j\*(rq.

.TP
.BR "\-\-gamedir \fIdir\fR, \-\fBd\fR\fIdir\fR"
With this option, games resources will be read from the directory
\fIdir\fR. Default is the current directory, unless a directory has
been specified in the config file (see below).

.TP
.BR "\-\-sci\-version \fIversion\fR, \-\fBV\fR\fIversion\fR"
This option sets the SCI version for freesci to emulate. 
Acceptable version numbers are of the form \fIx.yyy.zzz\fR, where
\fIx\fR is the major number, \fIyyy\fR is the minor number and \fIzzz\fR
the patch level.
.IP
Note that currectly only SCI0 and SCI01 (major/minor=0/000) games are supported.
.IP
Normally, the version will be autodetected from the game resource files.

.TP
.BR "\-\-disable\-mouse, \-m"
Many SCI games handle the mouse pointer differently if no mouse is
present in the system. This option instructs the interpreter to
tell the games that no mouse is present whenever they ask for one;
the actual effect depends on the individual game.

.TP
.BR "\-\-scale\-x \fIxfact\fR, \-\fBx\fR\fIxfact\fR"
.BR "\-\-scale\-y \fIyfact\fR, \-\fBy\fR\fIyfact\fR"
These options allow to explicitly specify the horizontal and vertical
scaling factors. The resulting size of the game window will be
320*xfact x 200*yfact, plus any window decorations.

.TP
.BR "\-\-color\-depth \fIbpp\fR, \-\fBc\fR\fIbpp\fR"
This sets the number of bits to use per pixel. Some visuals/graphics
drivers support several color depths, so that auto\-detection may not
yield the desired effects.

.TP
.BR "\-\-graphics \fIgfx\fR, \-\fBg\fR\fIgfx\fR"
With this option, you can specify which graphics driver is to be used. 
.IP
In this release, \fBsdl\fR, \fBggi\fR, \fBdfb\fR (DirectFB) and plain \fBxlib\fR are supported,
a separate \fBnull\fR driver which does not produce visible output is also provided.

.TP
.BR "\-\-midiout \fIdriver\fR, \-\fBO\fR\fIdriver\fR"
This is the output driver or interface to use. Currently, 
\fIunixraw\fR,
\fIalsaraw\fR, \fInull\fR, \fIossopl3\fR, and \fIossseq\fR (an OSS sequencer
driver) may be available on your system, ossseq being the default.

.TP
.BR "\-\-mididevice \fIdriver\fR, \-\fBM\fR\fIdriver\fR"
SCI was designed to support a variety of physical output devices. FreeSCI
currently supports the Rolant MT\-32 (\fImt32\fR, the default), an Adlib
device (\fIadlib\fR) and it also offers an MT\-32 to General MIDI translation 
layer (\fImt32gm\fR). Alternatively, sound may be turned off by using the
null driver (\fInull\fR).
Finally, the \fIadlibemu\fR device uses an OPL/2 emulator to run on top of
a PCM device, which may be specified separately.

.TP
.BR "\-\-sound\-server \fIserver\fR, \-\fBS\fR\fIserver\fR"
This option may be used to explicitly specify a sound server to use.
The sound server is an asynchronous process or thread that issues sound
output events and reports sound cues back to the interpreter; if you have
both possibilities (\fIunix\fR and \fIsdl\fR) for your system, you may have to
experiment to find out which works best for you. 

.TP
.BR "\-\-pcmout \fIdriver\fR, \-\fBP\fR\fIdriver\fR"
Specifies the PCM output driver to use (this is only relevant for the
\fIadlibemu\fR midiout driver right now). Popular choices are
\fIoss\fR, \fIalsa\fR and \fIsdl\fR; you should pick the one corresponding
to the sound system you are using on your system.

.TP
.BR "\-\-show\-rooms, \-\fBs\fR"
Forces FreeSCI to print out room numbers for every room you enter. This
can be used for teleporting; it is intended to be used for debugging.

.SH CONFIG FILE

.P
When run, FreeSCI will create a directory called \fI.freesci\fR in your
home directory (unless this directory already exists). If you run an SCI
game, this game will create another directory inside the \fI.freesci\fR
directory, to store its save games in.

.P
Also, if a file called \fIconfig\fR exists in this directory, it will be read
and parsed by the interpreter after the game has been loaded. This configuration
file can be divided into a global section and various game\-specific sections.
Within the config file, comments must be preceeded by a hash \*(lq#\*(rq sign.
Empty lines are ignored.

.P
Game\-specific sections are marked by a text string like \fB[GAME_ID]\fR,
where \fIGAME_ID\fR is an ID to use for the game. If the section also
contains a \fBresource_dir\fR entry, the ID may be passed to
\fIfreesci\fR as a parameter to start the game by its name.

.P
The config file section before the first game\-specific section is the
global configuration section; anything specified here will be used as
the setting for any game that does not explicitly request different
settings.

.P
Here is a complete listing of all options supported:

.P
GENERAL OPTIONS:

.TP
.BR resource_dir
Read the game's resource data from the specified 
location. Must not be used in the generic part of the config file.

.TP
.BR "version = \fIx.yyy.zzz\fR"
emulate SCI version \fIx.yyy.zzz\fR. The version 
number is sometimes printed on game discs, or can be found out by
grepping your main executable for "0.000." (for SCI0 games). It is
also displayed if the built\-in debugger is activated in the Sierra SCI
engine. See also the \fB\-\-sci\-version\fR command line option.

.TP
.BR console_log
Sets a logging file for FreeSCI's console output (by default, this is 
disabled).

.TP 
.BR "mouse = yes | no"
Specifies whether the interpreter should report to the game that it has 
a mouse.

.TP
GRAPHICS OPTIONS:

.TP
.BR "pic0_dither_mode = dither | flat | dither256"
\fBdither\fR: draw in 16 colors, same as Sierra SCI;
\fBflat\fR: interpolate colors (256 colors); this improves some
graphics;
\fBdither256\fR: dither in 256 colors; a compromise between dither and flat.

.TP
.BR "pic0_dither_pattern = scaled | unscaled"
\fBscaled\fR: perform picture dithering to blocks with a width of the horizontal
and a height of the vertical scaling factor;
\fBunscaled\fR: dither single pixels (same as scaled if the game is
being run unscaled).

.TP
.BR "pic0_brush_mode = scaled | ellipses | random\-ellipses | more\-random"
Affects how semi\-random brushes (used mostly for dirt and foilage) are
drawn in SCI0 background pictures. \fBscaled\fR: scale every semi\-random
pixel to a rectangular block; \fBellipses\fR: scale every semi\-random
pixel to a filled ellipse; \fBrandom\-ellipses\fR: as ellipses, but
slightly shift ellipse offset and size; \fBmore\-random\fR: add more
random pixels to the whole area.

.TP
.BR "pic0_line_mode = correct | fine | half"
Specify how lines are drawn when background pictures are rendered in
SCI0.  \fBcorrect\fR: draw lines appropriately scaled; \fBfine\fR: don't
scale lines (thin lines, may cause problems); \fBhalf\fR: draw lines at
half width (may cause problems).

.TP
.BR "dirty_strategy = 1 | clusters"
The \*(lqdirty strategy\*(rq is the strategy used to collect
modifications to the screen content. Modifying this may affect
performance on slow or networked systems.  \fB1\fR: collect everything in
one dirty region; \fBclusters\fR: cluster non\-overlapping modified regions
into a set of regions.

.TP
.BR "pic0_scaled = yes | no"
Whether SCI0 background pics should be scaled (may look better) or not
(faster, looks more like the original games). By default, it is disabled.

.TP
.BR "pic_buffer_size = #"
Number of background pics to store in an LRU buffer. Increasing this value
will increase the amount of memory used, but may considerably speed up
changing back to rooms you visited not too long ago.

.TP
.BR "view_filter = none | linear | trilinear"
Specifies the way views (non\-background images) are scaled
(this obviously does not affect unscaled images):
\fBnone\fR: no filtering is performed (default);
\fBlinear\fR: a simple linear filter is applied;
\fBtrilinear\fR: views are passed through a trilinear filter.

.TP
.BR "pic_filter = none | linear | trilinear"
Specifies scaling for background images; see \fBview_filter\fR
for a description of the options.

.TP
.BR "cursor_filter = none | linear | trilinear"
Specifies scaling for mouse pointers; see \fBview_filter\fR for a
description of the options.  This option does not apply to graphics
drivers which handle the mouse pointer explicitly (currently, only the
GGI driver is affected).

.TP
.BR "text_filter = none | linear | trilinear"
Specifies scaling for text; see \fBview_filter\fR
for a description of the options.

.TP
.BR "pic_antialiasing = none | simple"
If activated, this option will do an extra pass over background images
to anti\-aliase them, usually improving the overall picture quality. This
is set to \fBnone\fR by default.

.TP
.BR "gfx_driver = driver"
This selects one of the graphics drivers (currently \fBggi\fR, \fBsdl\fR, \fBdfb\fR, \fBxlib\fR or \fBnull\fR
on UNIXish platforms).

.TP
.BR "animation_delay = #"
This chooses the amount of microseconds to wait between
each sub\-element of a transition animation (also see
\fBanimation_granularity\fR). Setting
this to zero will disable transition animations completely.
The default is \fB5\fR.

.TP
.BR "animation_granularity = #"
This sets the amount of steps to execute
simultaneously for each transition animation. If transition animations seem
too slow on your system but you don't want to disable them completely, you
might want to try increasing this value.
The default is \fB4\fR.

.TP
.BR "alpha_threshold = #"
When using filtered images (specifically views, text, and cursors where
used by the graphics driver), this value is used to determine when a
part of the image should be drawn and when it should be omitted. The
definition space of this value is \fB0\fR to \fB255\fR, where larger
values cause more to be drawn.  This value does not affect unfiltered
images or images drawn with alpha blending.  Default is \fB129\fR.

.TP
SOUND OPTIONS:

.TP
.BR "midi_device = driver"
Chooses the default MIDI device; this can be \fBmt32\fR for plain MT\-32
output, or \fBmt32gm\fR to use FreeSCI's MT32 \-> General MIDI mapping
algorithm. Also Adlib (\fBadlib\fR) is supported.  This defaults to
\fBmt32gm\fR.

.TP
.BR "midiout_driver = driver"
Selects the output device to use. Available options are \fBalsaraw\fR
(using ALSA's raw MIDI output devices), \fBunixraw\fR (using
/dev/midi\-style raw MIDI output devices), \fBossseq\fR (for OSS
sequencer devices) and \fBwin32mci\fR on Win32 systems.  The default on
UNIXish systems is \fBossseq\fR.

.TP
.BR "pcmout_driver = driver"
Chooses a PCM output driver for use with the \fBadlibemu\fR midiout driver.
Options are \fBoss\fR, \fBalsa\fR, \fBsdl\fR and \fBnull\fR.

.TP
.BR "sound_server = server"
This chooses one of the asynchronous sound servers. For sound output,
FreeSCI uses an asynchronous process or thread; currently two
implementations of this mechanism are available: \fBunix\fR, which forks
off a separate process, and \fBsdl\fR, which uses libsdl's threading
mechanisms.  Defaults to \fBunix\fR, where available.

.TP
.BR "pcmout_stereo = 1 | 0"
Selects whether stereo output should be used (1) or not (0). Defaults
to using stereo output (this only affects pcm output, i.e. the \fBadlibemu\fR
output driver).

.TP
.BR "pcmout_rate = #"
Selects the output frequency to use for the pcmout driver (this
defaults to 22050). May be any value from 11025 to 48000 which is
supported by your sound hardware.

.TP
DRIVER\-SPECIFIC OPTIONS (GRAPHICS DRIVERS):

.TP
.BR "gfx.xlib.disable_shmem = yes | no"
Can be used to disable support for MIT Shm support
on the X11 Windowing System in cases where detection fails.
This is off by default, enabling SHM support.

.TP
.BR "gfx.sdl.swap_caps_ctrl = yes | no"
This option instructs the SDL driver to swap caps lock and ctrl when
reading input.  Disabled by default.

.TP
.BR "gfx.sdl.fullscreen = yes | no"
Toggles the SDL graphics driver's fullscreen option. Disabled by
default.

.TP
DRIVER\-SPECIFIC OPTIONS (SOUND DRIVERS):

.TP
.BR "midiout.alsaraw.card = #"
This specifies the ALSA card to use for raw MIDI output; the default is
\fB0\fR.

.TP
.BR "midiout.alsaraw.device = #"
Specifies the ALSA device, relative to the card, for raw MIDI output. It
also defaults to \fR0\fR.

.TP
.BR "midiout.unixraw.device = device"
Sets the device file to use for raw UNIX MIDI output.  This defaults to
\fB/dev/midi\fR.

.TP
.BR "midiout.ossseq.device = #"
Selects the OSS sequencer device number; this defaults to \fB1\fR.

.TP
.BR "midiout.ossseq.recorder = file"
Chooses a file the OSS sequencer should print debug output to. This is
not particularly helpful for everyday use, and disabled by default.


.SH EXAMPLES
Here is an exemplary configuartion file:
.PP
.ne 3
.nf
.RS
# FreeSCI configuration file
# For FreeSCI version 0.3.4

# default values:

console_log = /home/user/.freesci/log
pic_buffer_size = 4
pic0_brush_mode = more\-random
pic_antialiasing = simple
pic0_dither_mode = dither256
pic0_scaled = yes
pic0_line_mode = normal
pic0_dither_pattern = scaled
text_filter = trilinear
cursor_filter = trilinear
pic_filter = trilinear
view_filter = trilinear
midi_device = mt32
midiout_driver = alsaraw
alpha_threshold = 140
sound_server = unix

gfx_driver=ggi
animation_delay = 1
animation_granularity=4
gfx.ggi.swap_caps_ctrl=yes
gfx.xlib.swap_caps_ctrl=yes
gfx.sdl.swap_caps_ctrl=yes
midiout.alsaraw.device=0
midiout.unixraw.device=/dev/midi
midiout.ossseq.device=1
midiout.ossseq.recorder=/tmp/recorder

[LSL3]
resource_dir = /usr/share/freesci/lsl3

[KQ4]
resource_dir = /usr/share/freesci/kq4
version = 0.000.502
.RE
.fi
.PP

.SH SUPPORTED GAMES
.P
The following games have been tested with FreeSCI and are known to give
some level of interactivity. In theory, FreeSCI should be able to let
you complete all of these. Games marked with [c] have been completed
using FreeSCI.

.IP \(bu
.PD 0
Hero's Quest / Quest for Glory 1 [c]
.IP \(bu
Space Quest 3 [c]
.IP \(bu
King's Quest 1 (SCI version) [c]
.IP \(bu
King's Quest 4 [c]
.IP \(bu
Leisure Suit Larry 2 [c]
.IP \(bu
Leisure Suit Larry 3 [c]
.IP \(bu
Police Quest 2 [c]
.IP \(bu
Codename: Iceman
.IP \(bu
The Colonel's Bequest [c]
.IP \(bu
Conquest of Camelot
.IP \(bu
The Fun Seeker's Guide (from the SQ Collector's Series)
.IP \(bu
Hoyle's Book of Games (volume 1) (*)
.IP \(bu
Hoyle's Book of Games (volume 2) (*)
.PD 0.4v
.P
(*) Due to differences between the way Sierra SCI and FreeSCI
handle graphical widgets, these games may cause an accumulation
of widgets in the widget subsystem, resulting in a slowdown and
some increased memory usage. 



.SH SEE ALSO
.BR scitools(6)

.SH BUGS
.P

This release has the following limitations (plus some bugs):
.IP \(bu
.PD 0
Only SCI0 games (and some SCI01 games) are supported
.IP \(bu
The SCI debug functions aren't fully supported (and probably never
will be, since FreeSCI uses its own debug functions).
.PD 0.4v

.P
Please refer to http://freesci.linuxgames.com's bug list section for a
listing of all known and current bugs.

.SH AUTHORS
.P
FreeSCI is copyright (c) 1999,2000\-2003 by the following people:

.IP \(bu
.PD 0
Christoph Reichenbach <\fIcreichen@rbg.informatik.tu\-darmstadt.de\fR>
.IP \(bu
Carl Muckenhoupt <\fIcarl@wurb.com\fR>
.IP \(bu
Dmitry Jemerov <\fIyole@exch.nnz.spb.su\fR>
.IP \(bu
Magnus Reftel <\fId96reftl@dtek.chalmers.se\fR>
.IP \(bu
Petr Vyhnak <\fIpvyhnak@attglobal.net\fR>
.IP \(bu
Sergey Lapin <\fIslapin@karelia.ru\fR>
.IP \(bu
Lars Skovlund <\fIlskovlun@image.dk\fR>
.IP \(bu
Matt Hargett <\fImatt@use.net\fR>
.IP \(bu
Solomon Peachy <\fIpizza@shaftnet.org\fR>
.IP \(bu
Rickard Lind <\fIrpl@dd.chalmers.se\fR>
.IP \(bu
Rink Springer <\fIrink@springer.cx\fR>
.IP \(bu
Walter van Niftrik <\fIw.f.b.w.v.niftrik@stud.tue.nl\fR>
.IP \(bu
Rainer Canavan
.IP \(bu
Christopher T. Lansdown
.IP \(bu
Alexander Angas
.IP \(bu
Ruediger Hanke
.PD 0.4v

.P
This man page was written by Bas Zoetekouw <\fIbas@debian.org\fR> and
Christoph Reichenbach.
